# Design of 6T SRAM Cell using SkyWater 130nm technology.
The purpose of this Project is to implement the design of 6T SRAM Cell using eSim (An open-source Electronic Design Automation tool designed by FOSSEE Project team of Indian Institute of Technology Bombay) and SkyWater 10nm PDKs (Process Design Kit) sponsored by Google.

## Table of Contents
- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Reference Circuit Diagram](#reference-circuit-diagram)
- [eSim EDA Tool](#esim-eda-tool)
- [Google SkyWater PDK](#google-skywater-pdk)
- [Schematic Diagram](#schematic-diagram)
- [Write Opearation](#write-operation)
- [Read Operation](#read-operation)
- [References](#references)
- [Acknowledgement](#acknowledgement)
- [Author](#author)

## Introduction
As day by day, technology is being evolved and Data science is becoming the most crucial topic of interest. More the data, more the storage is needed. Though, this project demonstrates the design of a 6 - Transistor Static RAM cell that stores 1bit of data and also explains its READ and WRITE operation, implementation of design, and explains the function of how it stores 1bit in a cell. This SRAM cell is designed with CMOS (Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor) logic using the eSim tool and Sky130 technology.

## Reference Circuit Diagram

<Reference circuit snap>

### Description

SRAM, known as Static Random Access Memory also known as Read Write Memory has become a very crucial part of SOCs and ASIC. As the basic unit of SRAM is the SRAM cell, the need of SRAM cell is to perform stable and robust read/write  operation in such a way that it consumes the least power and enhance the on-chip storage capacity. The given circuit demonstrates six transistor SRAM cell, out of which four transistors Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q4 forms a cross-coupled CMOS inverter, that itself becomes a memory. And remaining two nmos act as access transistors. These access transistors are connected to the bit line and bit line bar that are denoted by “BL & BLB”. And word line here denoted by “WL” is connected to access transistors when the word line is set on, the access transistors can be accessed and similarly when a word line is set off the content of the memory comes set to hold state as the access transistors are turned off, and as a result, the data will remain unchanged in the cell, for the write operation bit line and bit line bar acts as input lines and for reading operation these lines would act as output lines. We would design this circuit using open-source SkyWater 130nm PDKs.

## eSim EDA Tool
eSim is an open source EDA tool for circuit design, simulation, analysis and PCB design, developed by FOSSEE Team at IIT Bombay. It is an integrated tool build using open source softwares such as KiCad, Ngspice and GHDL.

<esim snap>

### Features
- An open-source EDA tool.
- Perform Circuit Design.
- Perform Simulation.
- Perform Layout Design.
- Model builder and Subcircuit builder.
- Support for Mixed-Signal Simulations including Microcontrollers.
- eSim has been successfully ported to low cost FOSSEE laptop
- More deatils about eSim can be found [here](https://github.com/FOSSEE/eSim).

## Google SkyWater PDK

The SkyWater Open Source PDK is a collaboration between Google and SkyWater Technology Foundry to provide a fully open source Process Design Kit and related resources, which can be used to create manufacturable designs at SkyWater’s facility.

<Sky130 snap>

More details of SkyWater Open Source PDK can be found [here](https://github.com/google/skywater-pdk).

## Schematic Diagram

<schematic snap>

Spice Netlist generated by eSim for the above schematic using 180nm library for MOSFETs.

```
* /home/khalique/sram/sram_cell_write/sram_cell_write.cir

.include NMOS-180nm.lib
.include PMOS-180nm.lib

* Cross Coupled Transistors
m1 qb q gnd gnd CMOSN W=100u L=100u M=1
m2 qb q vdd vdd CMOSP W=100u L=100u M=1
m3 q qb gnd gnd CMOSN W=100u L=100u M=1
m4 q qb vdd vdd CMOSP W=100u L=100u M=1

* Access Transistors 
m5 bl wl q gnd CMOSN W=100u L=100u M=1
m6 blb wl qb gnd CMOSN W=100u L=100u M=1

.tran 0.1e-09 100e-09 0e-09

* Control Statements 
.control
run
print allv > plot_data_v.txt
print alli > plot_data_i.txt

.endc
.end
``` 
## Write Operation

Voltage sources and Pulses applied as input signals. 
```
* Inputs
vdd1 vdd gnd 1.8
vwl1 wl gnd pulse(0 1.8 0 25p 25p 20n 40n)
vq1 q gnd pulse(0 1.8 0 25p 25p 5n 10n)
```
Modified Spice Netlist for write operation with Sky130 models, here `sky130_fd_pr__pfet_01v8` represents P channel mosfet and `sky130_fd_pr__nfet_01v8` represents N channel mosfets.
```
* Spice netlist of write operation of 6T SRAM Cell

.lib "./models/sky130.lib.spice" tt

* Cross coupled Inverters
xm1 q qb vdd vdd sky130_fd_pr__pfet_01v8 w=0.84 l=0.21 m=1
xm2 q qb gnd gnd sky130_fd_pr__nfet_01v8 w=0.42 l=0.21 m=1
xm3 qb q gnd gnd sky130_fd_pr__nfet_01v8 w=0.42 l=0.21 m=1
xm4 qb q vdd vdd sky130_fd_pr__pfet_01v8 w=0.84 l=0.21 m=1

* Access Transistors
xm5 bl wl q gnd sky130_fd_pr__nfet_01v8 w=0.42 l=0.21 m=1
xm6 blb wl qb gnd sky130_fd_pr__nfet_01v8 w=0.42 l=0.21 m=1

* Inputs
vdd1 vdd gnd 1.8
vwl1 wl gnd pulse(0 1.8 0 25p 25p 20n 40n)
vbl1 q gnd pulse(0 1.8 0 25p 25p 5n 10n)
vblb1  blb gnd pulse(1.8 0 0 25p 25p 5n 10n)

.tran 0.1e-09 100e-09 0e-09

* Control Statements 
.control
run
plot v(q) v(qb)+2 v(bl)+4 v(blb)+6 v(wl)+8
print allv > plot_data_v.txt
print alli > plot_data_i.txt
.endc
.end
```
Spice Simulation results
- Results are unexpected with 180nm models.

<python plot>

- Waveform results with 130nm models

<ngspice snap>
<waveform>

## Read Operation
Voltage sources and Pulses applied as input signals.
```
* Inputs
vdd1 vdd gnd 1.8
vwl1 wl gnd pulse(0 1.8 0 25p 25p 20n 40n)
vq1 q gnd pulse(0 1.8 0 25p 25p 5n 10n)
```
Modified Spice Netlist for read operation with Sky130 models.
```
* Spice netlist of read operation of 6T SRAM Cell

.lib "./models/sky130.lib.spice" tt

* Cross coupled Inverters
xm1 q qb vdd vdd sky130_fd_pr__pfet_01v8 w=0.84 l=0.21 m=1
xm2 q qb gnd gnd sky130_fd_pr__nfet_01v8 w=0.42 l=0.21 m=1
xm3 qb q gnd gnd sky130_fd_pr__nfet_01v8 w=0.42 l=0.21 m=1
xm4 qb q vdd vdd sky130_fd_pr__pfet_01v8 w=0.84 l=0.21 m=1

* Access Transistors
xm5 bl wl q gnd sky130_fd_pr__nfet_01v8 w=0.42 l=0.21 m=1
xm6 blb wl qb gnd sky130_fd_pr__nfet_01v8 w=0.42 l=0.21 m=1

vdd1 vdd gnd 1.8
vwl1 wl gnd pulse(0 1.8 0 25p 25p 20n 40n)
vq1 q gnd pulse(0 1.8 0 25p 25p 5n 10n)

.tran 0.1e-09 100e-09 0e-09

* Control Statements 
.control
run
print allv > plot_data_v.txt
print alli > plot_data_i.txt
plot v(q) v(qb)+2 v(bl)+4 v(blb)+6 v(wl)+8
.endc
.end
```

Spice Simulation results
- Results are unexpected with 180nm models.

<python plot>

- Waveform results with 130nm models

<ngspice snap>
<waveform>

## References

- [Andrei Pavlov, Manoj Sachadev, CMOS SRAM Circuit Design and Parametric Test in Nano-Scaled Technologies](https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-1-4020-8363-1)

- [S.B. Lokesh1 " Design Of Read And Write Operations For 6t Sram Cell.” IOSR Journal of VLSI and Signal Processing (IOSR-JVSP) , vol. 8, no.1, 2018](https://www.iosrjournals.org/iosr-jvlsi.html)

- [Design of 1024x32 SRAM (32Kbits) using OpenRAM and SKY130 PDKs by Shon Taware](https://github.com/ShonTaware/SRAM_SKY130)

## Acknowledgement

[Kunal Ghosh](https://github.com/kunalg123), Co-founder of VLSI System Design (VSD) Corp. Pvt. Ltd.

## Author

[Mohammad Khalique Khan](https://github.com/Khalique13/), Final Year Bachelor of Technology, Electronics and Communication Engineering
- Contact: mkkhan5@myamu.ac.in
